.TH DOBUTSU 6 "2021-01-16" "Robert Clausecker" "Games"
.
.SH NAME
\fBdobutsu\fR \(en play Dobutsu Shogi
.
.SH SYNOPSIS
\fBdobutsu\fR
[-\fBqv\fR]
[-\fBc \fIcolor\fR]
[-\fBs \fIstrength\fR[\fI,strength\fR]]
[-\fBt \fItbfile.tb\fR]
.
.SH DESCRIPTION
\fBdobutsu\fR is an engine for the Japanese Shogi variant
\fIDobutsu Shogi\fR with a
.BR gnuchess (6)
like interface.
.
It uses a comprehensive endgame tablebase to achieve perfect play but
can also play at any desired strength.
.LP
The following options are supported:
.TP
-\fBc\fR \fIcolor\fR
Make the engine play \fIcolor\fR.
.
If \fIcolor\fR is one of \fBbBsS\fR, the engine plays Sente.
.
If it is one of \fBwWgG\fR, the engine plays Gote.
.
More than one colour can be provided to have the engine play against
itself.
.TP
-\fBq\fR
Do not print the board after each move.
.
This is the default.
.TP
-\fBs \fIstrength\fR[\fI,strength\fR]
Set engine strength to \fIstrength\fR, a positive floating point number.
.
The maximum strength is 700.
.
At this strength the engine achieves perfect play.
.
If two strength values of the form \fIstrength,strength\fR are provided,
the first strength is used for Sente while the second strength is used
for Gote.
.TP
-\fBt\fR \fItbfile.tb\fR
Load the endgame tablebase from \fItbfile.tb.\fR
.
If no -\fBt\fR option is provided, the endgame tablebase is loaded from
the location indicated in the environment variable DOBUTSU_TABLEBASE.
.
If that variable is unset, the place where the tablebase was installed
to and then files \fIdobutsu.tb\fR and \fIdobutsu.tb.xz\fR are tried in
the current working directory.
.TP
-\fBv\fR
Print the board after each move.
.
.SH COMMANDS
\fBdobutsu\fR is an interactive program that asks the user for commands
and responds to them if requested.
.
All interaction, including error messages, happens on standard input and
standard output.
.
Only fatal error messages are printed to standard error.
.
A command is either a move in algebraic notation or one of the
following:
.TP
\fBboth\fR
Make engine play both players, immediately playing out the rest of the
game at current engine strengths.
.TP
\fBexit\fR
Exit the program.
.TP
\fBforce\fR
Set the engine to play neither Sente nor Gote.
.TP
\fBgo\fR
Make the engine play the colour that is currently on the move.
.TP
\fBhelp\fR
Print a list of commands.
.TP
\fBhint\fR
Print what the engine would play.
.TP
\fBnew\fR [\fIposition\fR]
Start a new game.
.
If \fIposition\fR is provided, use the specified position as the
starting position, otherwise use the default position.  The format of
the position string is adopted from Forsyth-Edwards-Notation.  Refer
to the output of \fBshow position\fR for how this notation works.
.TP
\fBremove\fR
Undo the last two moves.
.TP
\fBsetup\fR [\fIposition\fR]
Alias for \fBnew\fR.
.TP
\fBshow \fIthing\fR
Print various useful pieces of information.
.
Valid values for
\fIthing\fR are:
.RS
.TP
\fBboard\fR
Print the current board.
.TP
\fBsetup\fR
Print board as a position string
.TP
\fBmoves\fR
Print possible moves.
.TP
\fBeval\fR
Print position evaluation.
.TP
\fBlines\fR
Print possible moves and their evaluation.
.RE
.TP
\fBstrength [\fIstrength\fR [\fIstrength\fR]]
If invoked with no arguments, print the current engine strengths.
.IP
If invoked with one or two arguments, set engine strength to a positive
floating-point number.
.
If two strengths are provided, the first one is used for Sente while the
second one is used for Gote.
.
The maximum strength is 700.
.
At this strength the engine achieves perfect play.
.TP
\fBundo\fR
Undo the previous move.
.
If the last move was an engine move, the engine is going to play another
move immediately.
.
Either use \fBforce\fR to stop the engine or \fBremove\fR to undo two
moves at a time.
.TP
\fBquiet\fR
Do not print the board after every move.
.TP
\fBquit\fR
Quit the program.
.TP
\fBverbose\fR
Print the board after every move.
.TP
\fBversion\fR
Print program version.
.
.SH RULES
Dobutsu Shogi is a two-player strategy game played on a 3\(mu4
board.
.
Each player has four pieces: A \fIlion,\fR an \fIelephant,\fR a
\fIgiraffe,\fR and a \fIchick\fR.
.
The player whose lion starts on the fourth rank is called \fISente.\fR
.
His pieces are denoted by uppercase characters.
.
The other player is called \fIGote\fR, denoted by lowercase characters.
.
\fISente\fR makes the first move, then both players alternate moves.
.
The initial setup looks like this:\FC
.LP
.RS
.nf
  ABC 
 +---+
1|gle|
2| c |
3| C |
4|ELG|
 +---+
.fi
.RE
.LP
\FTThe goal of the game is to either capture the opponents lion, or to
advance one's own lion to an unattacked square in the \fIpromotion
zone,\fR which is the rank farthest from the lion's starting square.
.
Sente's promotion zone\ is rank 1, whereas Gote's promotion zone is
rank 4.
.LP
Each piece can move in a variety of ways: The lion can move one
square into every direction, the elephant can move one square
diagonally, the giraffe can move one square horizontally or
vertically, the chick can move one square towards the promotion zone.
.
When a chick is moved into the promotion zone, it is promoted to a
\fIrooster,\fR which can move horizontally, vertically, or diagonally
towards the promotion zone.
.
The following diagram shows with asterisks the squares each of
Sente's pieces can move to:\FC
.LP
.RS
.nf
***  * *   *    *   ***
*L*   E   *G*   C   *R*
***  * *   *         *
.fi
.RE
.LP
\FTPieces cannot move onto squares occupied by a player's own pieces.
.
When a piece is moved onto a square occupied by an opponent's piece,
that piece is \fIcaptured\fR and transferred into the \fIhand\fR of the
capturer.
.
If the captured piece is a rooster, it is unpromoted to a chick.
.
Instead of moving a piece, a player may also \fIdrop\fR one of the piece
in his hand onto an arbitrary square on the board.
.LP
If a board position is repeated for the third time, the game is a draw.
.
There is no stalemate; if the only possible move is to move into check,
the lion has to move into check.
.
If no move is possible, the side to move looses the game.
.
.SH ENVIRONMENT
.TP
DOBUTSU_TABLEBASE
Endgame tablebase location.
.
.SH FILES
.TP
\fIdobutsu.tb, dobutsu.tb.xz\fR
Endgame tablebase files.
.
.SH EXIT STATUS
.TP
1
A fatal error occured.
.TP
0
No fatal error occured.
.
.SH EXAMPLES
The following is a sample session with some commands demonstrated.
.
The program prints the current move number as a prompt, user input is
printed in bold.
.LP
.RS
.nf
\FCLoading tablebase... done
1. \fBshow board\fR
  ABC 
 +---+
1|gle| 
2| c |
3| C |
4|ELG| *
 +---+
1. \fBCb3b2\fR
2. \fBshow board\fR
  ABC 
 +---+
1|gle| *
2| C |
3|   |
4|ELG| C
 +---+
2. \fBshow setup\fR
G/gle/-C-/---/ELG/C
2. \fBshow lines\fR
Ec1xb2 : #75   (24.22%)
Lb1xb2 : #-72  (22.95%)
Lb1-c2 : #-30  (22.07%)
Lb1-a2 : #-30  (22.07%)
Ga1-a2 : #-2   ( 8.68%)
2. \fBstrength 20\fR
2. \fBshow lines\fR
Ec1xb2 : #75   (60.59%)
Lb1xb2 : #-72  (20.54%)
Lb1-c2 : #-30  ( 9.44%)
Lb1-a2 : #-30  ( 9.44%)
Ga1-a2 : #-2   ( 0.00%)
2. \fBshow moves\fR
Ga1-a2
Ec1xb2
Lb1-c2
Lb1xb2
Lb1-a2
2. \fBshow eval\fR
#75
2. \fBgo\fR
My 2. move is : Ec1xb2
3. \fBgo\fR
My 3. move is : Gc4-c3
4. \fBshow setup\fR
G/gl-/-e-/-C-/ELG/c
4. \fBquit\fR\FT
.fi
.RE
.
.SH DIAGNOSTICS
.TP
\fBLoading tablebase... \fItbfile.tb: some error\fR
The tablebase could not be loaded for some reason.
.
All functionality that accesses the tablebase is unavailable.
.TP
\fBError (tablebase unavailable) : \fIsome command\fR
The tablebase could not be loaded and you tried to execute a command
that requires the tablebase to be loaded.
.TP
\fBError (invalid position) : \fIsome command\fR
You entered a \fBnew\fR or \fBsetup\fR command with an invalid position
string.
.TP
\fBError (unknown command) : \fIsome command\fR
You entered a command that is not known to this program.
.
Type \fBhelp\fR for a list of commands.
.TP
\fBError (strength must be positive) : \fIsome command\fR
You tried to set the engine strength to a nonpositive value.
.TP
\fBError (invalid strength) : \fIsome command\fR
You used the \fBstrength\fR command with an argument that could not be
parsed into a floating point number.
.
.SH SEE ALSO
.BR gnuchess (6),
.BR gnugo (6),
.BR xboard (6)
.
.SH CAVEATS
Even though its user interface is very similar to
.BR gnuchess (6),
.BR dobutsu (6)
is not
.BR xboard (6)
compatible.
.LP
Stricly speaking, the Dobutsu Shogi rules allow either play to
move his Lion to an attacked square on the fourth rank without winning.
.
The lion can then immediately be captured by the opponent.
.
As the rules are not clear as to what happens when the opponent does not
immediately capture, this implementation does not allow the lion to move
onto an attacked square on the fourth rank.
.
Moving into check is allowed in other situations.
.LP
The -\fBs \fIstrength\fR option adjusts a weighting function used during
move selection.
.
As the only information the engine has about the position's evaluation
is the entry in the endgame tablebase, its notion of what is a good move
sometimes differs from what a human thinks.
.
.SH HISTORY
Dobutsu Shogi is a Shogi variant invented by professional
Shogi player Madoka Kitao in 2008 and solved by University of Tokyo
researcher Tanaka Tetsuro in 2009.
.
Development of this software began as a hobby project in
July 2016 and concluded in February 2017.
.
.SH AUTHOR
.nf
Robert Clausecker <fuz@fuz.su>
.fi
